Petechial hemorrhage refers to the appearance of small,
pinpoint-sized red or purple spots on the skin,
mucous membranes, or even internal organs.
These dots are called petechiae.
Petechiae are caused by tiny amounts of bleeding
from small blood vessels known as capillaries.
There are many potential causes of petechial hemorrhaging,
but we will focus on petechiae formation
due to strangulation.
During strangulation,
the jugular veins and carotid arteries,
which are found next to each other,
are typically both obstructed.
When the jugular veins are blocked,
blood cannot leave the head.
Although the carotid arteries,
bringing blood into the head, may be blocked,
a second set of vessels,
called the vertebral arteries,
may still allow blood to enter.
When this happens,
blood pressure increases in the head
as blood enters but cannot leave.
As pressure builds in the capillaries,
the vessels burst open,
releasing small amounts of blood
into the surrounding tissue.
Petechiae may develop with pressure build-up
in as little as ten seconds.
As the blockage continues
and more pressure builds,
more petechiae are formed
until they cover the entire face.
This is known as florid petechial hemorrhage
and is often seen when someone has been
rendered unconscious or dead.
If the vertebral arteries are blocked
in addition to the carotids,
no blood is entering or leaving the head.
In this case,
pressure does not build in the blood vessels
and no petechial hemorrhaging occurs.